---
layout: post
title:  "Research methodology"
date:   2014-12-11
categories: research methodology
---
I am a process guy. I like thinking about research, sure, but I *love* thinking about how to research more efficiently. As my quiver of projects or potential projects grows (and let's be honest, mostly just the potential projects), I find that I have trouble keeping track of my thinking on each project. I'll have an idea, think and work on it for a few hours, and then get distracted by a more urgent task. Then, a couple weeks later when I have time to revisit the idea, I'll have nearly forgotten everything I read. No doubt this is in part the fault of my remarkably bad memory. So I'm working to develop a simple system to track my current status in each project. My current working hypothesis is that the best thing (for me) is a combination of Zotero and emacs org-mode.

[Zotero](http://www.zotero.org) is an essential tool for any researcher. In the past, I would download PDFs to a folder, take notes on the PDF in a separate file (if at all), and generate a bibliography by hand or by searching Google Scholar (again) for the papers I already found and using the BibTex export. Zotero consolidates that entire process. With the Chrome plugin I can flag papers I'm interested in, read them at my leisure, and take notes that are directly connected to the PDF. 

[emacs](http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/) is the second piece of the puzzle. This is where I write in detailed notes on my research process/thinking/etc. There is a balance to be struck here: too many notes and I'll spend all my time writing down every little thought, but too few and I won't process anything. org-mode has the benefit of letting me do out-line style collapses. There are downsides: I'm not a huge fan of emacs on Windows, but I have yet to find a better tool to use in Sublime. org-mode also lets me use Latex easily, which is a huge plus as the project becomes more advanced.

Using both of these is not ideal, and I'm sure I'll refine this solution. Another question I haven't resolved is how to arrange the file structure. Separate notes for each project? Or all notes in a single file? Or one centralized file for ideas, but get their own files once they reach a certain level of maturity (i.e. once I actually start collecting data)? And where do I keep track of my todo lists for each project. A separate file for those as well? org-mode has solutions for this, of course: there are ways to pull all of the todos from multiple files. But constantly elisp-hacking and adding new files to that list could get tiresome. 

All of which is to say: nothing here is settled. But the current status quo is Zotero+emacs with a centralized file for ideas and separate files for more mature projects. I'm not sure I like that. Maybe I'll see if I can find a better outline plugin for Sublime and go from there.